Have you ever been the victim of oppression or injustice?
Have you been angered by something someone has said or done?
Who of us hasn't?
In situations like that, people who don't know Jehovah often react in a way that's far from peaceful.
They retaliate, they fight, they hit back.
But we know that Jehovah sees what happened and he can set matters straight.
We're wise to remember the words of Jesus.
Happy are the mild tempered.
Happy are the peacemakers.
The Bible describes a man who remained mild and peaceable in some extremely difficult and stressful situations.
Repeatedly, he chose not to fight, preferring a course that led to peace.
That man was Jacob.
Jacob learned from the peaceful example of his father, Isaac.
There was a famine in the land, and Isaac moved his family to Girard, which was ruled by Abimlech, king of the Philistines.
Let's read about the problems that arose and see how Isaac dealt with them.
Please turn to Genesis 26 and verse 12.
And Isaac began to so seed in that land, and in that year he reaped 100 times what he sowed, for Jehovah was blessing him.
The man became wealthy, and he continued to prosper until he became very wealthy.
He acquired flocks of sheep and herds of cattle and a large body of servants, and the Philistines began to envy him.
So the Philistines took soil and stopped up all the wells that his father's servants had dug in the days of Abraham.
Abimlech then said to Isaac,
move from our neighborhood, for you have grown far stronger than we are.
So Isaac moved from there, and encamped in the valley of Girard, and began dwelling there.
And Isaac again dug the wells that had been dug in the days of his father Abraham, but that the Philistines had stopped up after Abraham's death,
and he called them by the names that his father had given them.
When the servants of Isaac were digging in the valley, they found a well of fresh water,
and the shepherds of Girard began quarreling with the shepherds of Isaac, saying,
the water is ours.
So he named the well Isaac, because they had quarreled with him, and they started digging another well, and they began quarreling over it also.
So he named it Sitna.
Later he moved away from there and dug another well, but they did not quarrel over it.
So he named it Rahoboth, and said,
it is because now Jehovah has given us ample room and has made us fruitful in the land.
Then he went up from there to bear Shiba.
That night Jehovah appeared to him and said,
I am the God of your father Abraham.
Do not be afraid for I am with you, and I will bless you and multiply your offspring on account of Abraham my servant.
The Philistines, motivated by envy, stop up all the wells that Abraham had dug,
and the king asks Isaac to move from the neighborhood.
Isaac now has a decision to make.
Perhaps some encourage him to stay put.
Think about how they might have reasoned.
You have done nothing wrong, Isaac.
Jehovah told you that you and your offspring would possess the land.
You have nothing to fear.
You have many servants, and they are stronger than the Philistines.
Why not hit back against those who have done this to your wells?
In this situation, what would you have done?
Isaac chooses a peaceful course.
He decides to move on.
This is not easy.
Isaac has many servants and flocks of sheep and herds of cattle.
He has tilled the ground, planted seed, and it is produced plentifully.
But he leaves that behind and moves on.
But Isaac's troubles are not over.
In his new location, his servants dig wells and find fresh water.
But the shepherds in that area say, the water is ours.
Isaac then digs another well.
But the local shepherds quarrel about that one too.
Again, instead of fighting over the matter, Isaac moves.
And finally, finds a place where he can reside in peace.
Jacob saw that his father's peaceful actions had a good effect.
He knew that Isaac had received Jehovah's blessing.
What's the lesson?
Parents never underestimate the powerful effect your good example can have on your children.
Jacob has a twin brother, Esau.
Of the two, Esau is born first.
But Jehovah foretells that contrary to custom, the older Esau will serve his younger brother.
Jehovah foresees what kind of personalities they'll develop.
And he knows that Esau will have little appreciation for spiritual matters.
This becomes evident when Esau exchanges his right as firstborn for a mere bowl of stew.
Sealing the matter with an oath.
But something more is involved.
In selling the birthright, he also gives up the right to receive a prophetic blessing from his father.
Years pass.
Isaac has grown old.
And he decides it's time to impart the blessing to his firstborn.
He may not know that Esau had sold his right as firstborn.
In any case, he tells Esau that he will bless him.
But asks him first to provide him with a tasty dish of fresh game from the field.
Rebecca, the twin's mother overhears this conversation.
And persuades Jacob to impersonate his twin brother while Esau is out hunting.
The plan is successful.
Isaac unwittingly blesses Jacob.
Esau at learning of this is furious.
Let's take up the account from Genesis chapter 27 and verse 41.
However, Esau harbored animosity against Jacob because of the blessing his father had given him.
And Esau kept saying in his heart,
The days of mourning for my father are getting closer.
After that, I am going to kill Jacob, my brother.
When the words of her older son Esau were told to Rebecca,
She at once sent for her younger son Jacob and said to him,
Look, your brother Esau is planning to take revenge by killing you.
Now my son, do as I say, get up and run away to my brother Leban at Hairan.
Dwell with him for a while until your brother's rage calms down.
Until your brother's anger towards you subsides and he forgets what you have done to him.
Then I will send for you from there.
Why should I lose both of you in one day?
After that, Rebecca kept saying to Isaac,
I am disgusted with my life because of the daughters of Hath.
If Jacob ever takes away from the daughters of Hath like these daughters of the land,
What good is my life?
So Isaac called Jacob and blessed him and commanded him, saying,
You must not take a wife from the daughters of Canaan.
Go away to Patan A. Ram, to the house of Bithuel, your mother's father,
And from there take for yourself a wife, from the daughters of Leban, your mother's brother.
God Almighty will bless you and make you fruitful and multiply you
And you will certainly become a congregation of peoples.
And He will give to you the blessing of Abraham, to you and to your offspring with you,
So that you may take possession of the land where you have been living as a foreigner,
Which God has given to Abraham.
So Isaac sent Jacob away.
And he departed for Patan A. Ram to Leban, the son of Bithuel, the Aramean,
the brother of Rebecca, the mother of Jacob and Esau.
Jacob's parents tell him to travel to his uncle, Leban, to find a wife.
Of course, the core issue is the problem with Esau.
Recall that earlier,
Isaac had a problem with the Philistines.
A problem that evidently could not be settled peacefully.
So what did Isaac do?
He moved on.
Now Jacob faces a similar situation.
His brother is seething with anger.
So Jacob leaves.
It means leaving his home and his family.
It means making a long journey to a distant land.
Jacob could have chosen to stand his ground.
He owns the birthright.
He could argue the matter with his father and mother.
I am no child. I am 77 years old.
Jacob does none of those things.
The Bible simply says,
Jacob obeyed his father and his mother and departed.
What's the lesson?
When we face a situation that can't be settled peacefully,
we probably won't need to flee for our lives to a distant land.
Sometimes, however, it is the course of wisdom to walk away from a situation.
Proverbs chapter 17 and verse 14 says,
Beginning a fight is like opening a floodgate.
Before the quarrel breaks out, take your leave.
While Jacob is on his way to his uncle,
Jehovah appears to Jacob in a dream
and assures him of his support and protection.
That does not mean that Jacob's troubles are over.
At the journey's end, he moves in with his uncle's household.
In time, a situation rises again that shows that Jacob is a man who loves peace.
Let's read about it from Genesis chapter 29 and verse 16.
Now Laban had two daughters.
The name of the older was Leah and the name of the younger Rachel.
But the eyes of Leah had no lustre,
whereas Rachel had become a very attractive and beautiful woman.
Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel, so he said,
I am willing to serve you seven years for your younger daughter, Rachel.
To this, Laban said,
It is better for me to give her to you than to give her to another man,
keep dwelling with me.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel.
But in his eyes, they were like just a few days because of his love for her.
Then Jacob said to Laban,
Give over my wife because my days are up and let me have relations with her.
With that, Laban gathered all the men of the place and made a feast.
But during the evening, he resorted to taking his daughter Leah
and bringing her to him that he might have relations with her.
Laban also gave his female servant, Zilpa, to his daughter Leah as a servant.
In the morning, Jacob saw that it was Leah.
So he said to Laban,
What have you done to me?
Was it not for Rachel that I served you?
Why have you tricked me?
To this, Laban said,
It is not our custom here to give the younger woman before the firstborn,
Celebrate the week of this woman.
After that, you will also be given this other woman in exchange for serving me seven more years.
Jacob did so and celebrated the week of this woman,
after which he gave him his daughter Rachel as a wife.
Besides, Laban gave his female servant Bilha to his daughter Rachel as her servant.
Jacob has reason to be upset.
He had arranged with Laban to work seven years for Rachel.
At the end of the seven years, a wedding feast is arranged.
But the heavily veiled woman brought into him is not Rachel.
It's Leah.
Imagine how shocked Jacob must have been.
Instead of admitting to his deceit,
Laban gives an excuse.
What thoughts come to Jacob's mind?
Does he consider that Jehovah might be working out his promise
to make Jacob's offspring plentiful?
Like the dust particles of the earth?
We don't know.
As it turns out,
Leah bears him six sons, including Levi and Judah,
family heads of the two most honored tribes of Israel.
Of course, Jacob couldn't have foreknown this.
Still, Jacob, the peacemaker,
accepts Leah and goes along with Laban's outrageous request
that he work an additional seven years for Rachel.
What's the lesson?
It's disappointing when others don't hold to their agreements.
Like Jacob.
Can we find it in our hearts to forgive
and find a way to preserve peace with them?
Jacob serves Laban for 14 years for his two wives.
And he works for Laban another six years for a flock of his own.
Finally, at Jehovah's direction,
he gathers his family along with his animals
and without informing Laban, he leaves for home.
When Laban learns of this, he is furious.
He chases and catches up with Jacob.
This is a dangerous situation.
One that can easily turn violent.
Imagine how it might have been.
Jacob had come to a mountainous region.
Possibly it's morning.
And the air is cool.
There are the sounds and smells of animals,
sheep, donkeys, camels.
There are many.
The servants attend to them,
getting them ready for the day's journey.
But then come cries of alarm.
Laban has come.
And he's not alone.
He arrives with strong men.
They gallop in on camels.
They dismount.
This is not a friendly visit.
Laban's men are ready to obey orders from Laban.
Jacob's servants quickly gather to the scene.
All eyes are fixed on Laban and Jacob who argue.
The previous night, Jehovah had warned Laban in a dream
to be careful about what he'd say to Jacob.
Still, Laban is angry and aggressive.
Laban makes two charges.
First, he says,
Why have you resorted to outwitting me
and carrying my daughters off like captives taken by the sword?
Why did you run away secretly and outwit me and not tell me?
The answer to that charge is obvious.
Jacob replies,
It was because I was afraid.
For I said to myself,
You might take your daughters away from me by force.
Laban also charges that Jacob has stolen his household gods.
Rachel has indeed stolen the gods,
but Jacob knows nothing about this.
A search is made,
but the idols are not found.
Jacob then makes his defense.
Let's take up our reading at Genesis chapter 31 and verse 36.
At that, Jacob became angry and began to criticize Laban.
Jacob then said to Laban,
What is my offense and for what sin are you hotly pursuing me?
Now that you have searched through all my goods,
what have you found that belongs to your house?
Put it here in front of my brothers and your brothers
and let them decide between the two of us.
During these 20 years that I have been with you,
your sheep and your goats never miscarried,
and I never ate the rams of your flock.
I did not bring you any animal torn by wild beasts.
I would stand the loss of it myself.
Whether the animal was stolen by day,
or was stolen by night,
you would demand compensation from me.
By day, the heap consumed me,
and the cold by night and sleep would flee from my eyes.
This makes 20 years for me in your house.
I have served you 14 years for your two daughters,
and six years for your flock,
and you kept changing my wages 10 times.
If the God of my Father,
the God of Abraham,
the one whom Isaac fears had not been on my side,
you would now have sent me away empty handed.
God has seen my affliction and the toil of my hands,
and that is why he reproved you last night.
Then, Laban answered Jacob.
The daughters are my daughters,
and the children, my children,
and the flock, my flock,
and everything you are looking at is mine.
And my daughters,
what can I do today against these
or against their children whom they have born?
Now come, let us make a covenant, you and I,
and it will serve as a witness between us.
So Jacob took a stone and set it up as a pillar.
Then Jacob said to his brothers,
pick up stones,
and they took stones and made a pile.
After that, they ate there on the pile of stones.
And Laban began calling at Jigarse Hadootha,
but Jacob called a galliad.
Laban then said,
this pile of stones is a witness between me and you today.
That is why he named it galliad,
and the watchtower, for he said,
let Jehovah keep watch between you and me
and we are out of each other's sight.
If you mistreat my daughters,
and if you start taking wives in addition to my daughters,
though there is no man with us,
remember that God will be a witness between you and me.
Laban went on to say to Jacob,
here is this pile of stones,
and here is the pillar that I have erected between you and me.
This pile of stones is a witness,
and the pillar is something that bears witness,
that I will not pass beyond this pile of stones
to bring harm to you,
and you will not pass beyond this pile of stones
and this pillar to bring harm to me.
Let the God of Abraham and the God of Nahor,
the God of their Father, judge between us.
You have to beware by the one whom his father Isaac fears.
After that, Jacob offered a sacrifice in the mountain,
and invited his brothers to eat bread,
so they ate and spent the night in the mountain.
However, Laban got up early in the morning
and kissed his grandchildren and his daughters and blessed them.
Then Laban departed and returned home.
Jacob had served Laban faithfully for 20 years,
even though Laban had defrauded and exploited him.
Laban doesn't acknowledge that,
but rather dishonestly claims that he is the rightful owner
of all that Jacob has with him.
Laban then suggests that they make a covenant of peace,
ensuring that neither family will bring harm to the other.
Laban's motive is not that he loves peace.
It might have been to ensure that Jacob will not return
with the household gods after Laban's death
to deprive his sons of their inheritance.
In any case, Jacob agrees.
Everyone relaxes.
There's to be no violence,
and a monument is set up to memorialize the agreement.
Despite the many years of oppression,
Jacob agrees to a covenant of peace.
He does not harbor resentment or seek revenge.
That crisis is over for Jacob.
But now, another one looms.
Jacob sends messengers to his brother.
They say that Jacob is returning
and that he seeks Esau's favor.
The messengers return with the news
that Esau is on his way to meet him
and with him are 400 men.
Oh my!
Is Esau still angry?
Understandably, Jacob is worried.
He does not want to fight with his brother.
Let us see how he handles the situation.
Please turn to Genesis chapter 32 and verse 13.
And he spent the night there.
Then he took some of his possessions
as a gift for Esau his brother.
200 female goats.
20 male goats.
200 female sheep.
20 rams.
30 camels nursing their young.
40 cows.
20 female dokeys.
And 10 full grown male dokeys.
He handed them over to his servants.
One drove after another.
And he said to his servants.
Cross over ahead of me.
And you were to set a space
between one drove and the next.
He also commanded the first one.
In case Esau my brother should meet you
and ask to whom do you belong?
And where are you going?
And to whom do these ahead of you belong?
Then you should say,
to your servant Jacob.
It is a gift sent to my Lord.
To Esau.
And look, he himself is also behind us.
And he commanded also the second,
the third, and all those following the drools.
To this word, you are to speak to Esau when you meet him.
And you should also say,
here is your servant Jacob behind us.
For he said to himself,
if I appease him by sending a gift ahead of me,
then afterward when I see him,
he may give me a kindly reception.
Jacob wants peaceful relations with his brother.
He sends a generous gift,
hundreds of animals to help make that possible.
Was Jacob weak-minded?
Too cowardly to stand up to his brother?
Not at all.
Why, as the time neared for the meeting with Esau,
Jacob wrestles with an angel until dawn
to receive further assurance of Jehovah's blessing.
Let's now see what happens when the two brothers meet.
Please turn to Genesis chapter 33 and verse 1.
Now Jacob raised his eyes and saw Esau coming.
And 400 men were with him.
So he divided the children among Leah, Rachel,
and the two female servants.
He put the female servants and their children in front.
Leah and her children after them.
And Rachel and Joseph behind them.
Then he himself went ahead of them
and bowed down to the earth seven times
as he came near to his brother.
But Esau ran to meet him,
and he embraced him and kissed him.
And they burst into tears.
When he raised his eyes and saw the women and the children,
he said,
Who are these with you?
To which he said,
The children with whom God has favored your servant.
At that, the female servants came forward with their children
and bowed down.
And Leah too came forward with her children and they bowed down.
Then Joseph came forward with Rachel and they bowed down.
Esau said,
What is the purpose of all this camp of travelers that I have met?
He replied in order to find favor in the eyes of my Lord.
Then Esau said,
I have a great many possessions, my brother.
Keep what is yours.
However, Jacob said,
No, please.
If I have found favor in your eyes,
you must take my gift from my hand.
Because I brought it so that I could see your face.
And I have seen your face
as though seeing God's face
in that you received me with pleasure.
Take, please,
the gift conveying my blessing that was brought to you.
For God has favored me.
And I have everything I need.
And he continued to urge him so that he took it.
What a happy outcome.
Instead of an angry confrontation,
there is a joyful reunion.
The two men shed tears.
They embrace again.
Jacob is the peacemaker.
How did he prove that?
He prayed.
And he acted in harmony with his prayers.
And gifts.
He showed honor and respect to his brother,
calling him Lord,
and bowing seven times.
What's the lesson?
Doesn't this account well illustrate
the extent to which we should be willing to go
to preserve peace with our Christian brothers and sisters?
We learn so much about seeking peace from Jacob.
Threatened by his brother while living at home,
he moved away.
When deceived by Laban regarding Rachel and Leah,
he yielded.
When chased down and accused by Laban,
Jacob agreed to a covenant of peace.
And when confronting Esau,
he offered a gift.
Keep in mind,
in none of these situations was Jacob the one
who apologized,
yet throughout his life,
Jacob loved peace.
He relied on Jehovah
and Jehovah blessed him.
Jehovah never forgot Jacob
and how he pursued peace
in his dealings with others.
When we do the same,
when we pursue peace
in the face of injustice,
in the face of persecution,
in small issues,
as well as in big issues,
Jehovah will not forget us either.
Jehovah will richly bless us
if we love peace
just as Jacob loved peace.